- [Instructor] Next, we'll explore the interfaces
and implementations related to queues
within the Java collections framework.
If you've ever stood in a line you're familiar with a queue.
You enter at the back of the line,
which is also known as its tail.
Then you wait until you're at the head of the line,
or we might say the front of the line before it's your turn.
In Java, a queue is a collection
that is used to hold elements for processing,
sort of like the line we just discussed.
Queues typically work the same way.
The first item in the queue is the first to be processed,
just like the first person in a line
is the first to get their turn.
We call this first-in, first-out, or FIFO order.
Most implementations of a queue are FIFO,
but there are some that use a priority ranking
or another ordering strategy
to arrange their elements for processing.
To work with the queue, six methods are included
on its interface in addition to those
that are inherited by extending the collection interface.
Using a visual, we can see how these methods are used
to work with the queue.
Methods like add or offer are used to add items
to the tail of the queue.
Operations like pull and remove are performed
at the head of the queue.
These methods are used to retrieve the next element
in the queue for processing and will remove it
from the collection.
If we want to examine the element at the head of the queue
without removing it, we can use the element or peek methods
to get a reference to the element.
Now, if we actually wanted to remove the element
at the head, we would have to use poll or remove,
which we just saw.
You might be wondering why there are two methods
for each of these operations on the queue.
The difference between them is how they deal
with a full or an empty queue.
There are queues that have a maximum capacity,
which are known as a bounded or blocking queue.
If we attempt to insert an element into a bounded queue
which is full, the add method will throw an exception,
while the offer method will return false.
A similar situation occurs when the queue is empty.
If we try to remove or examine the head element
in an empty queue, the methods remove an element
will throw an exception,
while poll and peek will return null.
If we take a look at the type hierarchy for a queue,
you'll notice that two of its implementations
actually implement the deque interface that extends queue.
Of these implementations,
ArrayDeque is the most commonly used
queue and deck implementation.
The LinkedList is not used often,
and the PriorityQueue uses a comparitor
or elements implementing the comparable interface
to determine their position within the queue.
So it's one of those queues we mentioned
that don't use FIFO order.
I should point out that I've only listed types found
in the java.util package.
There's another group of specialized queue interfaces
and types found within the java.util.concurrent package
for handling multithreaded scenarios.
We'll mainly use the ArrayDeque implementation
for working with a deque and a queue.
So let's first do some hands-on examples,
working with it as a queue, then we'll take a closer look
at the deque interfaces later in the chapter.